ART03-Adult-Generated Hippocampal Neurons Allow the Flexible Use of Spatially Precise Learning Strategies
============================================================================

Abstract

Despite enormous progress in the past few years the specific contribution of newly born granule cells to the function of the adult hippocampus is still 
not clear. We hypothesized that in order to solve this question particular attention has to be paid to the specific design, the analysis, and the 
interpretation of the learning test to be used. We thus designed a behavioral experiment along hypotheses derived from a computational model predicting 
that new neurons might be particularly relevant for learning conditions, in which novel aspects arise in familiar situations, thus putting high demands 
on the qualitative aspects of (re-)learning. In the reference memory version of the water maze task suppression of adult neurogenesis with temozolomide 
(TMZ) caused a highly specific learning deficit. Mice were tested in the hidden platform version of the Morris water maze (6 trials per day for 5 days 
with a reversal of the platform location on day 4). Testing was done at 4 weeks after the end of four cycles of treatment to minimize the number of 
potentially recruitable new neurons at the time of testing. 

A pesar de los enormes avances de los últimos años, la contribución específica de las ``células granulares`` recién nacidas a la función del 
``hipocampo`` adulto 
aún no está clara. Planteamos la hipótesis de que, para resolver esta cuestión, es necesario prestar especial atención al diseño, el análisis y la 
interpretación específicos de la prueba de aprendizaje. Por lo tanto, diseñamos un experimento conductual basado en hipótesis derivadas de un modelo 
computacional que predice que las nuevas neuronas podrían ser especialmente relevantes para condiciones de aprendizaje en las que surgen aspectos 
novedosos en situaciones familiares, lo que impone altas exigencias a los aspectos cualitativos del (reaprendizaje). En la versión de ``memoria de 
referencia`` de la tarea del laberinto acuático, la supresión de la ``neurogénesis`` adulta con ``temozolomida (TMZ)`` provocó un déficit de aprendizaje 
altamente 
específico. Se realizó la prueba a ratones en la versión de plataforma oculta del laberinto acuático de Morris (6 ensayos al día durante 5 días, con 
inversión de la ubicación de la plataforma el día 4). La prueba se realizó 4 semanas después de finalizar cuatro ciclos de tratamiento para minimizar el 
número de nuevas neuronas potencialmente reclutables en el momento de la prueba.

The reduction of neurogenesis did not alter longterm potentiation in CA3 and the dentate gyrus but abolished the part of dentate gyrus LTP that is attributed to the new neurons. TMZ did not have any overt side effects at the time of testing, 
and both treated mice and controls learned to find the hidden platform. Qualitative analysis of search strategies, however, revealed that treated mice 
did not advance to spatially precise search strategies, in particular when learning a changed goal position (reversal). New neurons in the dentate gyrus 
thus seem to be necessary for adding flexibility to some hippocampus-dependent qualitative parameters of learning. Our finding that a lack of 
adult-generated granule cells specifically results in the animal’s inability to precisely locate a hidden goal is also in accordance with a specialized 
role of the dentate gyrus in generating a metric rather than just a configurational map of the environment. The discovery of highly specific behavioral 
deficits as consequence of a suppression of adult hippocampal neurogenesis thus allows to link cellular hippocampal plasticity to well-defined hypotheses 
from theoretical models.

Introduction
------------

The last few years have seen progress in elucidating the relevance of adult neurogenesis for hippocampal function with respect to both learning and 
affective functions [1–8]. However, behavioral assessments in the Morris water maze (MWM), which despite some well-known disadvantages is considered a 
‘‘gold standard’’ in the field and a prime test of more complex hippocampal function in spatial learning, yielded somewhat equivocal results [2,4,6,9]. 
It has sometimes been suggested that the discrepancies were largely due to the different paradigms used to suppress adult neurogenesis (cytostatic drugs, 
irradiation, or genetic manipulation). Although we here also present a new, simple, and efficient way to suppress adult neurogenesis our main focus was 
rather on increasing the sensitivity of the water maze task to identify those qualitative changes in test performance that, according to our hypothesis, 
should be dependent on adultgenerated neurons in the dentate gyrus (DG).

En los últimos años se ha avanzado en la ``elucidación`` de la relevancia de la ``neurogénesis adulta`` para la función hipocampal con respecto al 
aprendizaje y 
las ``funciones afectivas`` [1–8]. Sin embargo, las ``evaluaciones conductuales en el laberinto acuático de Morris`` (MWM), que a pesar de algunas 
desventajas 
bien conocidas se considera un "estándar de oro" en el campo y una prueba principal de la función hipocampal más compleja en el aprendizaje espacial, 
arrojó resultados algo equívocos [2,4,6,9]. En ocasiones se ha sugerido que las discrepancias se debieron en gran medida a los diferentes paradigmas 
utilizados para suprimir la neurogénesis adulta (fármacos citostáticos, irradiación o manipulación genética). Aunque aquí también presentamos una forma 
nueva, simple y eficiente de suprimir la neurogénesis adulta, nuestro enfoque principal fue más bien aumentar la sensibilidad de la tarea del laberinto 
acuático para identificar aquellos cambios cualitativos en el rendimiento de la prueba que, según nuestra hipótesis, deberían depender de las neuronas 
generadas por adultos en el giro dentado (DG).

En los últimos años se ha avanzado en la elucidación de la relevancia de la neurogénesis adulta para la función hipocampal con respecto al aprendizaje y 
las funciones afectivas [1–8]. Sin embargo, las evaluaciones conductuales en el laberinto acuático de Morris (MWM), que a pesar de algunas desventajas 
bien conocidas se considera un "estándar de oro" en el campo y una prueba principal de la función hipocampal más compleja en el aprendizaje espacial, 
arrojó resultados algo equívocos [2,4,6,9]. En ocasiones se ha sugerido que las discrepancias se debieron en gran medida a los diferentes paradigmas 
utilizados para suprimir la neurogénesis adulta (fármacos citostáticos, irradiación o manipulación genética). Aunque aquí también presentamos una forma 
nueva, simple y eficiente de suprimir la ``neurogénesis adulta``, nuestro enfoque principal fue más bien aumentar la ``sensibilidad`` de la tarea del 
laberinto 
acuático para identificar aquellos cambios cualitativos en el rendimiento de la prueba que, según nuestra hipótesis, deberían depender de las neuronas 
generadas por adultos en el ``giro dentado (DG)``.

En los últimos años se ha avanzado en la elucidación de la relevancia de la neurogénesis adulta para la función hipocampal con respecto al aprendizaje y 
las funciones afectivas [1–8]. Sin embargo, las evaluaciones conductuales en el laberinto acuático de Morris (MWM), que a pesar de algunas desventajas 
bien conocidas se consideran un “estándar de oro” en el campo y una prueba principal de la función hipocampal más compleja en el aprendizaje espacial, 
arrojaron resultados algo equívocos [2,4,6,9]. En ocasiones se ha sugerido que las discrepancias se debieron en gran medida a los diferentes paradigmas 
utilizados para suprimir la neurogénesis adulta (fármacos citostáticos, irradiación o manipulación genética). Aunque aquí también presentamos una forma 
nueva, simple y eficiente de suprimir la neurogénesis adulta, enfoque nuestro principal fue más bien aumentar la sensibilidad de la tarea del laberinto 
acuático para identificar aquellos cambios cualitativos en el rendimiento de la prueba que, según nuestra hipótesis, deben depender de las neuronas 
generadas por adultos en el giro dentado (DG).

We hypothesize that adult neurogenesis optimizes the lean neuronal network of the DG to cope with changing, behaviorally relevant stimuli in the 
environment [10]. Survival in a changing environment requires balancing between establishing stable cognitive contingencies on one side and maintaining 
the possibility for flexibly altering these contingencies on the other (stabilityplasticity dilemma). 
Our specific hypothesis, derived from a computational model, is that new neurons in the DG allow decreasing the risk of catastrophic interference between 
already encoded contingencies and newly appearing ones when the task conditions change [11,12]. To test our hypothesis we used a reversal protocol of the 
classical water maze task, where the hidden platform is moved after three days of a first acquisition phase, whereas all cue configurations outside the 
arena remain unchanged [13]. To further support the formation of stable representations the starting positions remained constant for each day of the 
experiment. After changing the goal position animals are thus forced to re-learn their response to master the task successfully. In such situation a 
robust functional plasticity of the encoding network in the DG is required because an encoding rule acquired previously during the first acquisition 
phase has to be omitted in favor of a new one representing the changed cue-goal configurations.

Planteamos la hipótesis de que la ``neurogénesis adulta`` optimiza la red neuronal del ``DG`` para afrontar los estímulos cambiantes y conductualmente 
relevantes 
del entorno [10]. La supervivencia en un entorno cambiante requiere un equilibrio entre el establecimiento de contingencias cognitivas estables, por un 
lado, y el mantenimiento de la posibilidad de modificarlas con flexibilidad, por otro (dilema de plasticidad-estabilidad). Nuestra hipótesis específica, 
derivada de un modelo computacional, es que las nuevas neuronas en el DG permiten disminuir el riesgo de interferencia catastrófica entre las 
contingencias ya codificadas y las de nueva aparición cuando cambian las condiciones de la tarea [11,12]. Para probar nuestra hipótesis, utilizamos un 
protocolo inverso de la tarea clásica del laberinto acuático, donde la plataforma oculta se mueve después de tres días de una primera fase de 
adquisición, mientras que todas las configuraciones de las señales fuera de la arena permanecen inalteradas [13]. Para respaldar aún más la formación de 
representaciones estables, las posiciones iniciales se mantuvieron constantes durante cada día del experimento. Tras cambiar la posición objetivo, los 
animales se ven obligados a reaprender su respuesta para dominar la tarea con éxito. En tal situación, se requiere una plasticidad funcional robusta de 
la red de codificación en el DG porque se debe omitir una regla de codificación adquirida previamente durante la primera fase de adquisición en favor de 
una nueva que represente las configuraciones señal-objetivo modificadas.

To assess the qualitative aspects of learning, we analyzed the different behavioral strategies used to find the hidden platform in the Morris water maze 
[14–17]. Classification of searching behaviors and their associated swim patterns was performed using a parameter-based algorithm, which allows 
comparisons between the contributions of each 
respective strategy consistently against the same standard. Whereas we found control animals to proceed reliably towards using allocentric strategies, 
where distal cues provide geometric reference to an animal’s current location, treated mice largely failed to do so. After platform reversal, a lack of 
newborn hippocampal neurons resulted in a strong persevering preference for the old goal position. Thus, our findings clearly point towards a 
highly-specific role for adult generated granule cells in mastering a spatial task flexibly and efficiently, especially when a previously acquired rule 
needs to be abandoned in favor of a new but still similar one.

Para evaluar los aspectos cualitativos del aprendizaje, analizamos las diferentes estrategias conductuales utilizadas para encontrar la plataforma oculta 
en el laberinto acuático de Morris [14–17]. La clasificación de las conductas de búsqueda y sus patrones de nado asociados se realizó mediante un 
algoritmo basado en parámetros, que permite comparar consistentemente las contribuciones de cada estrategia respectiva con el mismo estándar. Mientras 
que observamos que los animales de control procedían de forma fiable al uso de estrategias alocéntricas, donde las señales distales proporcionan una 
referencia geométrica a la ubicación actual del animal, los ratones tratados no lo hicieron en gran medida. Tras la inversión de la plataforma, la 
ausencia de neuronas hipocampales recién nacidas resultó en una fuerte preferencia perseverante por la antigua posición objetivo. Por lo tanto, nuestros 
hallazgos apuntan claramente a un papel altamente específico de las células granulares generadas por adultos en el dominio de una tarea espacial de forma 
flexible y eficiente, especialmente cuando es necesario abandonar una regla previamente adquirida en favor de una nueva pero similar.

Results
-------

Suppression of adult neurogenesis
---------------------------------

To suppress neurogenesis in adult mice we established a new pharmacological approach based on four cycles of treatment with the DNA-alkylating agent 
temozolomide (TMZ; Figure 1). TMZ shows an excellent blood brain barrier passage and has a very advantageous side effect profile [18–20]. In a dosage 
finding experiment we found a clear dose-dependency after monocyclic treatment. Using 25 mg TMZ per kg body weight for three single daily injections was 
found to reduce proliferation (number of BrdU-positive cells) in the dentate gyrus by more than 80% (277623 vs. 15896134 cells in vehicle controls, 
t-test: t(9) = 3.14, p,0.05). Because doubling 
that dose did not result in a significant higher reduction of BrdU-positive cells TMZ was applied at a dose of 25 mg/kg for all following experiments. 
After four treatment cycles precursor cell proliferation was decreased by .90% (13476178 BrdU2 positive cells in controls vs. 84693 for TMZ treated mice, 
resulting in a substantial reduction of recruitable newborn granule cells (t-test: t(9) = 2.94, p,0.001).

Para suprimir la neurogénesis en ratones adultos, establecimos un nuevo enfoque farmacológico basado en cuatro ciclos de tratamiento con el agente 
alquilante de ADN temozolomida (TMZ; Figura 1). TMZ muestra un excelente paso a través de la barrera hematoencefálica y tiene un perfil de efectos 
secundarios muy ventajoso [18-20]. En un experimento de búsqueda de dosis, encontramos una clara dependencia de la dosis después del tratamiento 
monocíclico. El uso de 25 mg de TMZ por kg de peso corporal para tres inyecciones diarias únicas redujo la proliferación (número de células 
BrdU-positivas) en el giro dentado en más del 80% (277623 frente a 15896134 células en los controles del vehículo, prueba t: t(9) = 3,14, p, 0,05). 
Debido a que duplicar esa dosis no resultó en una reducción significativamente mayor de células BrdU-positivas, se aplicó TMZ a una dosis de 25 mg/kg 
para todos los experimentos posteriores. Después de cuatro ciclos de tratamiento, la proliferación de células precursoras disminuyó en un 0,90 % 
(13476178 células positivas para BrdU2 en los controles frente a 84693 en los ratones tratados con TMZ, lo que dio como resultado una reducción 
sustancial de las células granulares recién nacidas reclutables (prueba t: t(9) = 2,94, p, 0,001).

In contrast, TMZ-induced myelosuppression had fully recovered after 4 weeks, when the animals were tested in the water maze (Figure 2A, B). Increase of 
body weight, locomotor skills and motor activity were all normal (data not shown and Figure 2C). No differences in exploratory behavior were found 
between groups (Figure 2D). There was neither morphological activation of microglia nor an increase in microglia numbers (Figure 2E, F). The 4-week 
interval thus ensured that at the time of behavioral testing only a minimum of potentially recruitable neurons would be present [21] but all potentially 
relevant transient side effects had ceased.

Por el contrario, la mielosupresión inducida por TMZ se recuperó por completo tras 4 semanas, cuando los animales fueron evaluados en el laberinto 
acuático (Figuras 2A, B). El aumento de peso corporal, las habilidades locomotoras y la actividad motora fueron normales (datos no mostrados y Figura 
2C). No se observaron diferencias en la conducta exploratoria entre los grupos (Figura 2D). No se observó activación morfológica de la microglía ni un 
aumento en su número (Figuras 2E, F). Por lo tanto, el intervalo de 4 semanas garantizó que, en el momento de la evaluación conductual, solo estuviera 
presente un mínimo de neuronas potencialmente reclutables [21], pero que todos los efectos secundarios transitorios potencialmente relevantes hubieran 
cesado.

Por el contrario, la mielosupresión inducida por TMZ se recuperó por completo tras 4 semanas, cuando los animales fueron evaluados en el laberinto 
acuático (Figuras 2A, B). El aumento de peso corporal, las habilidades locomotoras y la actividad motora fueron normales (datos no mostrados y Figura 
2C). No se observaron diferencias en la conducta exploratoria entre los grupos (Figura 2D). No se observó activación morfológica de la microglía ni un 
aumento en su número (Figuras 2E, F). Por lo tanto, el intervalo de 4 semanas garantizó que, en el momento de la evaluación conductual, solo estuviera 
presente un mínimo de neuronas potencialmente reclutables [21], pero que todos los efectos secundarios transitorios potencialmente relevantes hubieran 
cesado.



Electrophysiology
------------------

To assess hippocampal function at the systems level we investigated LTP in the DG and CA1. In the DG, LTP is physiologically inhibited by GABAergic 
interneurons. Still lacking that inhibition the immature adult-born neurons, in contrast to older granule cells, show a reduced threshold for LTP 
induction [22,23]. Consequently, unless the GABAergic inhibition of granule cells is blocked, 
stimulating the medial perforant path with high-frequency bursts elicits a weak LTP in the DG that is based on the newly generated neurons [2,24]. In 
TMZ-treated mice this characteristic weak LTP was not detectable (Figure 3A, C, D, F(1,198) = 252.8, p,0.05, ANOVA). After application of GABA receptor 
antagonist bicuculline, however, strong LTP could be elicited in both groups, indicating physiological synaptic plasticity in mature neurons (Figure 3B). 
LTP in CA1 was unaffected by TMZ treatment (Figure 3E). This implied that after TMZ treatment, only LTP in the DG was 
influenced and only in a manner consistent with the reduced level of ongoing neurogenesis.

Para evaluar la función hipocampal a nivel de sistemas, investigamos la LTP en el DG y CA1. En el DG, la LTP es inhibida fisiológicamente por 
interneuronas GABAérgicas. Aún careciendo de dicha inhibición, las neuronas adultas inmaduras, en contraste con las células granulares más viejas, 
muestran un umbral reducido para la inducción de LTP [22,23]. En consecuencia, a menos que se bloquee la inhibición GABAérgica de las células granulares, 
la estimulación de la vía perforante medial con ráfagas de alta frecuencia provoca una LTP débil en el DG que se basa en las neuronas recién generadas 
[2,24]. En ratones tratados con TMZ, esta LTP débil característica no fue detectable (Figura 3A, C, D, F(1,198) = 252.8, p, 0.05, ANOVA). Sin embargo, 
después de la aplicación del antagonista del receptor GABA bicuculina, se pudo provocar una LTP fuerte en ambos grupos, lo que indica plasticidad 
sináptica fisiológica en neuronas maduras (Figura 3B). La LTP en CA1 no se vio afectada por el tratamiento con TMZ (Figura 3E). Esto implica que, tras el 
tratamiento con TMZ, solo se vio afectada la LTP en el DG, y solo de forma coherente con la reducción del nivel de neurogénesis en curso.

Reversal learning in the Morris water maze
------------------------------------------

We trained mice on a reference memory version of the MWM task with 6 trials per day for 5 days and a new platform position (reversal) on the beginning of 
day 4 [13]. Although TMZ-treated mice performed significantly worse than controls for the entire experiment (latency, F(1,590)= 34.95, p,0.001, repeated 
measures ANOVA), both TMZ-treated 
mice and controls (CTR) successfully learned to navigate to the hidden platform during the first three days (Figure 4A). At the end of this period there 
were no significant differences between the groups in path length and latency time to reach the hidden platform. Although TMZ-treated animals and 
controls generally succeeded in learning the MWM, significant differences appeared on day two of the acquisition phase regarding both latency and path 
length (Figure 4A, t(9) = 3.42 p,0.001 for latency and t(9)= 2.77, p,0.01 for path length, Student’s t-test).

Entrenamos ratones en una versión de memoria de referencia de la tarea MWM con 6 ensayos diarios durante 5 días y una nueva posición de la plataforma 
(inversión) al comienzo del cuarto día [13]. Aunque los ratones tratados con TMZ tuvieron un rendimiento significativamente peor que los controles 
durante todo el experimento (latencia, F(1,590) = 34,95, p <0,001, ANOVA de medidas repetidas), tanto los ratones tratados con TMZ como los controles 
(CTR) aprendieron a navegar con éxito hasta la plataforma oculta durante los primeros tres días (Figura 4A). Al final de este período, no se observaron 
diferencias significativas entre los grupos en la longitud del recorrido ni en el tiempo de latencia para alcanzar la plataforma oculta. Aunque los 
animales tratados con TMZ y los controles generalmente lograron aprender el MWM, aparecieron diferencias significativas el segundo día de la fase de 
adquisición con respecto a la latencia y la longitud de la trayectoria (Figura 4A, t(9) = 3,42 p,0,001 para latencia y t(9) = 2,77, p,0,01 para la 
longitud de la trayectoria, prueba t de Student).

Swim speed of both groups did not differ throughout the experiment (data not shown). In the 1st trial of day 4 (1st probe trial), when the platform had 
been moved to the opposite quadrant, mice from both groups spent significantly more time in the previous goal quadrant than 
in the other quadrants, indicative of successful spatial learning (t(9), p,0.05 for comparison of the NE quadrant with each other quadrant and for each 
group, Student’s t-test, Figure 4D, E).

La velocidad de nado de ambos grupos no varió a lo largo del experimento (datos no mostrados). En la primera prueba del día 4 (primera prueba de sonda), 
cuando la plataforma se movió al cuadrante opuesto, los ratones de ambos grupos pasaron significativamente más tiempo en el cuadrante objetivo anterior 
que en los demás, lo que indica un aprendizaje espacial exitoso (t(9), p<0,05 para la comparación del cuadrante NE con cada cuadrante y para cada grupo, 
prueba t de Student, Figuras 4D, E).

After reversal, further significant differences were found. As apparent in the heat maps visualizing the probability for the mice to be present at a 
given location, TMZ-treated mice took significantly longer to develop a clear preference for the first goal and persevered swimming to that platform 
position even after two days of training following reversal indicating a lack of cognitive flexibility to cope with the altered challenge (Figure 4B, C). 
A second probe trial at the end of the reversal phase showed that, whereas controls had successfully learned to navigate reliably and precise to the new 
platform position, TMZ-treated mice largely failed to adapt to the changed situation and to develop an appropriate new spatial preference (Figure 4F, G).

Tras la reversión, se observaron diferencias significativas adicionales. Como se aprecia en los mapas de calor que visualizan la probabilidad de que los 
ratones estuvieran presentes en una ubicación determinada, los ratones tratados con TMZ tardaron significativamente más en desarrollar una preferencia 
clara por el primer objetivo y perseveraron nadando hasta esa posición de la plataforma incluso después de dos días de entrenamiento tras la reversión, 
lo que indica una falta de flexibilidad cognitiva para afrontar el nuevo desafío (Figuras 4B, C). Una segunda prueba de sondeo al final de la fase de 
reversión mostró que, mientras que los controles habían aprendido a navegar con fiabilidad y precisión hasta la nueva posición de la plataforma, los 
ratones tratados con TMZ no lograron adaptarse a la nueva situación ni desarrollar una nueva preferencia espacial adecuada (Figuras 4F, G).

Qualitative aspects of spatial learning
---------------------------------------

To assess the qualitative aspects of learning the water maze task we analyzed the respective search strategies displayed by the mice to locate the hidden 
platform (Figure 5). Parameter-based classification of search patterns turned out to be reliable for both groups indicating that treated animals used 
identical basic principles to implement the full range of strategies (Figure 6A).

Para evaluar los aspectos cualitativos del aprendizaje de la tarea del laberinto acuático, analizamos las estrategias de búsqueda de los ratones para 
localizar la plataforma oculta (Figura 5). La clasificación de los patrones de búsqueda basada en parámetros resultó fiable para ambos grupos, lo que 
indica que los animales tratados utilizaron principios básicos idénticos para implementar todas las estrategias (Figura 6A).

 Before and after reversal we 
found a clear progression from thigmotaxis to direct swimming for both groups (Figure 6B; thigmotaxis F(4,72) = 6.37, 
p,0.001, random search F(4,72) = 11.17, p,0.001, scanning F(4,72) = 6.14, p,0.001, directed search F(4,68) = 3.95, p,0.001, focal search F(4,72) = 8.63, 
p,0.001, direct swimming F(4,72) = 7.8, p,0.001 ANOVA, inner-subject test). However, treated animals and controls differed significantly in using the 
respective strategies to master the task. The inter-subject test revealed highly significant differences for focal search (F(1,18) = 14.82, p,0.001) and 
direct swimming (F(1,18) = 23.31, p,0.001) as well as significant differences for scanning 
(F(1,18) = 5.78, p,0.05) and perseverance (F(1,18) = 9.87, p,0.05). A highly significant interaction effect day6group was found for direct swimming 
(F(4,72) = 6.67, p,0.001) and perseverance (F(4,72) = 8.34, p,0.001). For scanning (F(4,72) = 3.17, p,0.05) and directed search (F(4,72) = 2.66, p,0.05) 
the interaction was significant. Group specific differences firstly appeared only on the level of scanning, when the search becomes increasingly 
systematic. Importantly, the group differences turned out to be especially large when hippocampusmediated spatial precision became essential. Over time, 
trial-wise contribution of strategies differed significantly between treated mice and controls for scanning (p,0.05, Mann-Whitney on trials 3, 11, 12 and 
13), focal search (p,0.05 on trial 14), directed search (p,0.05 on trials 10, 17 and 18), direct swimming (p,0.001 on trials 11, 16 and 17) and 
perseverance (p,0.05 on trials 19, 20, 22 and 23). All ANOVAs were done using the Bonferroni correction.

Antes y después de la reversión encontramos una clara progresión de tigmotaxis a natación directa para ambos grupos (Figura 6B; tigmotaxis F(4,72) = 
6,37, p, 0,001, búsqueda aleatoria F(4,72) = 11,17, p, 0,001, escaneo F(4,72) = 6,14, p, 0,001, búsqueda dirigida F(4,68) = 3,95, p, 0,001, búsqueda 
focal F(4,72) = 8,63, p, 0,001, natación directa F(4,72) = 7,8, p, 0,001 ANOVA, prueba de sujeto interno). Sin embargo, los animales tratados y los 
controles difirieron significativamente en el uso de las respectivas estrategias para dominar la tarea. La prueba intersujeto reveló diferencias 
altamente significativas para búsqueda focal (F(1,18) = 14,82, p, 0,001) y natación directa (F(1,18) = 23,31, p, 0,001), así como diferencias 
significativas para escaneo (F(1,18) = 5,78, p, 0,05) y perseverancia (F(1,18) = 9,87, p, 0,05). Se encontró un efecto de interacción altamente 
significativo día6grupo para natación directa (F(4,72) = 6,67, p, 0,001) y perseverancia (F(4,72) = 8,34, p, 0,001). Para escaneo (F(4,72) = 3,17, p, 
0,05) y búsqueda dirigida (F(4,72) = 2,66, p, 0,05) la interacción fue significativa. Las diferencias específicas de grupo aparecieron inicialmente solo 
en el nivel de escaneo, cuando la búsqueda se vuelve cada vez más sistemática. Cabe destacar que las diferencias de grupo resultaron ser especialmente 
significativas cuando la precisión espacial mediada por el hipocampo se volvió esencial. Con el tiempo, la contribución de las estrategias, por ensayo, 
difirió significativamente entre los ratones tratados y los controles para el escaneo (p < 0,05, Mann-Whitney en los ensayos 3, 11, 12 y 13), la búsqueda 
focal (p < 0,05 en el ensayo 14), la búsqueda dirigida (p < 0,05 en los ensayos 10, 17 y 18), la natación directa (p < 0,001 en los ensayos 11, 16 y 17) 
y la perseverancia (p < 0,05 en los ensayos 19, 20, 22 y 23). Todos los ANOVA se realizaron con la corrección de Bonferroni.

 Because the distribution of 
differences in strategy use appeared to reflect an underlying temporal pattern we looked for systematical changes in the 
respective contributions to group performance in treated animals compared to controls (Figure 6C). In the first trial treated mice and controls differ 
only to a small degree with respect to random and scanning strategies. Importantly, when exposing the animals to the pool for the very first time no 
differences were found for thigmotaxis behavior (Figure 6C left). In general, the use of directed and place specific search patterns turned out to be at 
least delayed in mice with suppressed adult neurogenesis. Furthermore, to find the hidden platform TMZ mice consistently relied on scanning and directed 
search at the expense of focal search and direct swimming, the latter representing the truly allocentric search patterns with the highest spatial 
precision. On day 3, in the late phase of the first acquisition period, both focal search and direct swimming were found only sparsely among treated 
animals. Surprisingly, on that day the absolute mean difference in latency between groups was found to be minimal, whereas the sum of relative 
differences in strategy contribution was high for TMZ mice.

Dado que la distribución de las diferencias en el uso de estrategias parecía reflejar un patrón temporal subyacente, buscamos cambios sistemáticos en las 
respectivas contribuciones al rendimiento grupal en los animales tratados en comparación con los controles (Figura 6C). En el primer ensayo, los ratones 
tratados y los controles difieren solo levemente con respecto a las estrategias aleatorias y de escaneo. Cabe destacar que, al exponer a los animales a 
la piscina por primera vez, no se observaron diferencias en el comportamiento de tigmotaxis (Figura 6C izquierda). En general, el uso de patrones de 
búsqueda dirigida y específica de lugar resultó al menos retrasado en ratones con neurogénesis adulta suprimida. Además, para encontrar la plataforma 
oculta, los ratones TMZ recurrieron sistemáticamente al escaneo y la búsqueda dirigida en detrimento de la búsqueda focal y la natación directa; esta 
última representa los patrones de búsqueda verdaderamente alocéntricos con la mayor precisión espacial. El día 3, en la fase tardía del primer período de 
adquisición, tanto la búsqueda focal como la natación directa se detectaron escasamente entre los animales tratados. Sorprendentemente, ese día la 
diferencia media absoluta en la latencia entre los grupos fue mínima, mientras que la suma de las diferencias relativas en la contribución a la 
estrategia fue alta para los ratones TMZ.

Convolution analysis
--------------------

Our finding that treated mice reached comparable performance levels at the end of the first acquisition phase raised the important question whether 
progression to the spatially most precise, allocentric strategies is mandatory for learning the reference memory version of the water maze. 
Alternatively, the task might be mastered by simply improving the proficiency of using generally less effective strategies. Therefore, we used 
convolution analysis to test the hypothesis that effectively switching to the most effective search patterns is the learning strategy generally 
underlying acquisition of the MWM task (Figure 6D–F, see methods section for details).

Nuestro hallazgo de que los ratones tratados alcanzaron niveles de rendimiento comparables al final de la primera fase de adquisición planteó la 
importante pregunta de si la progresión hacia las estrategias alocéntricas, espacialmente más precisas, es obligatoria para aprender la versión de 
memoria de referencia del laberinto acuático. Alternativamente, la tarea podría dominarse simplemente mejorando la competencia en el uso de estrategias 
generalmente menos efectivas. Por lo tanto, utilizamos el análisis de convolución para comprobar la hipótesis de que el cambio efectivo a los patrones de 
búsqueda más efectivos es la estrategia de aprendizaje que generalmente subyace a la adquisición de la tarea MWM (Figura 6D-F, véase la sección de 
métodos para más detalles).

By comparing the values measured with predictions from two models holding constant either the frequency or efficiency with which each strategy was 
applied, linear regression analysis revealed an effective progression towards direct swimming to be the general learning strategy in both groups (CTR: r 
= 0.94 compared to r = 0.68; TMZ: r 
= 0.83 compared to r = 0.54; Figure 6 E, F). This finding indicates that treated mice, too, solved the task by trying to switch to the more advanced 
spatially precise learning strategies.

Al comparar los valores medidos con las predicciones de dos modelos que mantuvieron constante la frecuencia o la eficiencia de aplicación de cada 
estrategia, el análisis de regresión lineal reveló una progresión efectiva hacia la natación directa como estrategia de aprendizaje general en ambos 
grupos (CTR: r = 0,94 frente a r = 0,68; TMZ: r = 0,83 frente a r = 0,54; Figuras 6 E, F). Este hallazgo indica que los ratones tratados también 
resolvieron la tarea al intentar cambiar a estrategias de aprendizaje espacialmente precisas más avanzadas.

Discussion 
----------

The key finding in our study is that suppression of adult hippocampal neurogenesis results in specific and subtle learning deficits in the reference 
memory version of the MWM task. Because of the notably high specificity of the deficits and our data on a normal hematological, physiological and 
behavioral status at the time of testing, the observed effects of a substantially reduced adult neurogenesis cannot be explained only as side effects of 
TMZ treatment. Importantly, because relying on the strict evaluation of numerically defined parameters the algorithm-based classification of search 
patterns served as a sensitive internal control for general changes in learning behavior. The reliability with which respective search patterns were 
identified for treated mice did not differ from that found for the control group, indicating that TMZ treatment did not disrupt the constitutive elements 
necessary to develop the full range of search strategies.

El hallazgo clave en nuestro estudio es que la supresión de la neurogénesis hipocampal adulta resulta en déficits de aprendizaje específicos y sutiles en 
la versión de memoria de referencia de la tarea MWM. Debido a la especificidad notablemente alta de los déficits y a nuestros datos sobre un estado 
hematológico, fisiológico y conductual normal en el momento de la prueba, los efectos observados de una neurogénesis adulta sustancialmente reducida no 
pueden explicarse únicamente como efectos secundarios del tratamiento con TMZ. Es importante destacar que, debido a que se basa en la evaluación estricta 
de parámetros definidos numéricamente, la clasificación algorítmica de los patrones de búsqueda sirvió como un control interno sensible para los cambios 
generales en la conducta de aprendizaje. La confiabilidad con la que se identificaron los respectivos patrones de búsqueda para los ratones tratados no 
difirió de la encontrada para el grupo de control, lo que indica que el tratamiento con TMZ no alteró los elementos constitutivos necesarios para 
desarrollar la gama completa de estrategias de búsqueda.

Six to 8 week-old adult-generated granule cells become selectively recruited into existing hippocampal networks while learning the spatial version of the 
MWM task [21]. Therefore, in order to effectively remove the cells usually recruited in the course of spatial learning, both duration of TMZ treatment 
and the timepoint of behavioral testing after the end of treatment are of some importance to the study design. Using a multi-cyclic treatment paradigm 
over four weeks followed by a reconstitution period of another four weeks we ensured that only a minimum of new neurons was available for recruitment 
when mice were subjected to behavioral testing. The remaining adult-born granule cells would make only a minor functional contribution to information 
processing in the DG and thus their benefit might have been insufficient to allow effective coping with changes among stimulus configurations. Given that 
full reconstitution of the precursor cell pool likely occurs not within days, the role of new neurons born after the end of TMZ treatment could also be 
neglected.

Las células granulares adultas de seis a ocho semanas de edad se reclutan selectivamente en las redes hipocampales existentes mientras aprenden la 
versión espacial de la tarea MWM [21]. Por lo tanto, para eliminar eficazmente las células que suelen reclutarse durante el aprendizaje espacial, tanto 
la duración del tratamiento con TMZ como el momento de la prueba conductual tras su finalización son importantes para el diseño del estudio. Mediante un 
paradigma de tratamiento multicíclico de cuatro semanas, seguido de un período de reconstitución de otras cuatro semanas, nos aseguramos de que solo un 
mínimo de nuevas neuronas estuviera disponible para el reclutamiento cuando los ratones se sometieron a la prueba conductual. Las células granulares 
adultas restantes solo realizarían una contribución funcional menor al procesamiento de la información en el GD y, por lo tanto, su beneficio podría 
haber sido insuficiente para permitir una adaptación eficaz a los cambios en las configuraciones de los estímulos. Dado que la reconstitución completa 
del conjunto de células precursoras probablemente no se produce en cuestión de días, también podría desestimarse el papel de las nuevas neuronas nacidas 
tras la finalización del tratamiento con TMZ.


Although TMZ did not completely wipe out adult neurogenesis (as reported after irradiation), treated mice showed profound impairments in cognitive 
flexibility while learning the MWM, both before and after platform reversal. During the first acquisition phase treated animals needed longer to develop 
a precise spatial preference for the goal. Furthermore, they relied primarily on a delayed progression to directed search patterns and generally failed 
to proceed to the most precise place-specific and allocentric strategies. Such selective impairment during task acquisition is consistent with data from 
a previous ablation studies [6,7] and our own strain comparison study regarding the latencies to find a hidden platform [25].

Aunque TMZ no eliminó por completo la neurogénesis adulta (como se informó tras la irradiación), los ratones tratados mostraron un profundo deterioro de 
la flexibilidad cognitiva durante el aprendizaje de la MWM, tanto antes como después de la inversión de plataforma. Durante la primera fase de 
adquisición, los animales tratados necesitaron más tiempo para desarrollar una preferencia espacial precisa por el objetivo. Además, se basaron 
principalmente en una progresión retardada hacia patrones de búsqueda dirigida y, en general, no lograron avanzar hacia las estrategias más precisas, 
específicas de lugar y alocéntricas. Este deterioro selectivo durante la adquisición de la tarea concuerda con los datos de estudios previos de ablación 
[6,7] y nuestro propio estudio de comparación de tensiones respecto a las latencias para encontrar una plataforma oculta [25].

After moving the goal to the opposite pool quadrant treated mice displayed profound difficulties to learn the platform’s new position. The persevering 
preference for the first goal was abandoned only very slowly over a number of trials and even persisted on the second day after reversal. Nonetheless, 
convolution analysis clearly showed that the general pattern of progression towards more effective and directed strategies still exists in treated mice. 
Although the second probe trial indicated no successful learning of the reversed platform position, at least 50% of the TMZ mice still developed directed 
search patterns in favor of the new goal position. Therefore, as already found for the first acquisition phase, learning was not generally impaired in 
treated animals but appeared to be significantly delayed, when a change of the task’s key aspects required the already learned contingencies to be 
changed.

Tras mover el objetivo al cuadrante opuesto de la piscina, los ratones tratados mostraron profundas dificultades para aprender la nueva posición de la 
plataforma. La preferencia perseverante por el primer objetivo se abandonó muy lentamente a lo largo de varios ensayos e incluso persistió al segundo día 
tras la inversión. No obstante, el análisis de convolución mostró claramente que el patrón general de progresión hacia estrategias más efectivas y 
dirigidas persiste en los ratones tratados. Aunque el segundo ensayo de prueba no indicó un aprendizaje exitoso de la posición invertida de la 
plataforma, al menos el 50 % de los ratones TMZ aún desarrollaron patrones de búsqueda dirigidos a favor de la nueva posición del objetivo. Por lo tanto, 
como ya se observó en la primera fase de adquisición, el aprendizaje no se vio afectado en general en los animales tratados, sino que pareció retrasarse 
significativamente cuando un cambio en los aspectos clave de la tarea requirió modificar las contingencias ya aprendidas.


Importantly, the inability to flexibly cope with changes among relevant contingencies as a consequence of substantially reduced numbers of adult 
generated hippocampal neurons is predicted by a recent mathematical model [12]. Following that model, to ensure the efficient and non-interfering storage 
of both newer and already existing representations in CA3, the encoding mechanism in the DG must be adapted depending on the respective statistical 
properties of the given spatial context. Consequently, in our study the lack of newborn and plastic granule cells prevented an effective adaptation of 
the DG network, especially after platform reversal when a main contingency has changed.

Es importante destacar que un modelo matemático reciente [12] predice la incapacidad de gestionar con flexibilidad los cambios entre las contingencias 
relevantes como consecuencia de la reducción sustancial del número de neuronas hipocampales generadas por adultos. Según este modelo, para garantizar el 
almacenamiento eficiente y sin interferencias de las representaciones, tanto nuevas como existentes, en CA3, el mecanismo de codificación en el DG debe 
adaptarse en función de las propiedades estadísticas respectivas del contexto espacial dado. En consecuencia, en nuestro estudio, la ausencia de células 
granulares nuevas y plásticas impidió una adaptación eficaz de la red del DG, especialmente tras la inversión de plataforma cuando una contingencia 
principal ha cambiado.



An effective progression from thigmotaxis to precise and place specific allocentric navigation depends on a metric representation of the environment 
which in turn requires a successful integration of the available distant cues. Thus, as the delayed progress to the most effective search patterns was 
consistently accompanied by a profound lack of spatial precision in getting to the goal most directly, it seems reasonable to assume that both 
impairments might have emerged from a single common effect of an impaired adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Indeed, deficits related either to spatial 
precision or reduced functional plasticity after reversal can be linked by the hypothesis that new adult generated granule cells serve to flexibly encode 
novel stimulus configurations experienced the first time. 

In order to provide a precise metric representation of the visual cues in terms of exact angles 
and distances allowing the animal to use true allocentric strategies, the relative positions between all relevant stimuli need to be integrated into a 
single coherent map during training. Since it has been shown by Goodrich-Hunsaker et al. that a specific function of the DG is to provide a metric 
representation as opposed to a just configurational one in CA3, the role of new granule cells might be thought of as a possible substrate for 
facilitating the rapid encoding and integration of novel cue configurations encountered by an organism when the relevant context has changed [26]. This 
interpretation is in accordance with findings from a recent study by Dupret et al. showing that ablation of adult neurogenesis results in an impairment 
to flexibly express spatial memories acquired previously using either changing or constant starting positions [7]. The essential need of an opportunity 
to form stable, integrated representations in order to develop allocentric search strategies is also consistent with our finding that in the control 
group focal search and direct swimming were used by more than 50% of the animals only after more than two days of training. 

Importantly, a repeated 
exposure to the same common spatial context (i.e. the MWM pool, including the hidden goal) seems to be an essential prerequisite for a detailed metric 
representation to be formed. The use of multiple starting positions, held constant within days likely supports the further formation of stable encoding 
rules for redundant stimulus configurations. This might at least partly explain the somewhat contradictory results of previous studies using the DMP 
version of the MWM paradigm without assessing the qualitative aspects of 
spatial learning [27,28] (but see also [7]). In that variant, the position of the platform is changed in each trial, thus effectively preventing a stable 
platform-related encoding rule to become manifested in the DG network, which – as demonstrated here – requires more than one day or six trials of 
training. Only stable or at least reliably reoccurring variants of certain cue-configurations might allow the network in the DG to adapt sufficiently to 
perceive a change of the cues as significantly new.

Given an environment with changing contingencies, the lack of adult-generated granule cells in the DG would not only impair the animal’s ability to 
encode novel aspects of the cue configurations encountered. Rather, both a clear differentiation between stimulus configurations being part of distinct 
sets as well as the integration of those belonging to the same sets of cues might be seriously compromised. Thus, the inability to develop true 
allocentric search strategies and a profound lack in flexibility after changing the platform’s position may likely turn out to be two sides of the same 
medal but this link needs to be clarified in further studies.

En un entorno con contingencias cambiantes, la ausencia de células granulares generadas por adultos en el DG no solo afectaría la capacidad del animal 
para codificar aspectos novedosos de las configuraciones de señales encontradas. Además, tanto la clara diferenciación entre las configuraciones de 
estímulos que forman parte de conjuntos distintos como la integración de las que pertenecen al mismo conjunto de señales podrían verse seriamente 
comprometidas. Por lo tanto, la incapacidad para desarrollar verdaderas estrategias de búsqueda alocéntrica y una profunda falta de flexibilidad tras 
cambiar la posición de la plataforma podrían ser dos caras de la misma moneda, pero esta relación debe aclararse en estudios posteriores.

The involvement of altered executive functions as a consequence of TMZ treatment needs to be discussed as an possible alternative explanation for the 
impairments found in our study. However, our results clearly argue against such an explanation. First, treated mice successfully suppressed their 
tendency to swim fast and repetitively along the wall, panicking to find a way out. From an executive perspective this can be considered as a key point 
for mastering the water maze task effectively. Indeed a wide range of pharmacological treatments, selective lesioning of brain regions and gene 
knock-outs resulted in substantially elevated levels of thigmotactic behavior which is often accompanied by passive floating [16,29]. Because we did 
neither observe passive floating at all nor did we find any differences in thigmotaxis, a general effect of TMZ treatment on executive functions seems 
unlikely. 


Secondly, we have conducted a convolution analysis to show that mice from the TMZ group primarily relied on an effective progression through 
the strategies available. The fact that after a multi cyclic TMZ treatment the animals showed a clear dependence on the ability to switch their 
behavioral strategies towards the more effective hippocampal ones (as observed for controls) provides another strong argument against confounding side 
effects of TMZ on the executive system. However, as the general progression appeared to be slowed down after treatment potential side effects on 
executive functions cannot be completely ruled out. On the other hand it seems hard to explain why a problem in executive control caused as a side-effect 
of a systemic treatment should result in the selective inability to develop and use precise allocentric behavioral strategies.

Given the hypothesis that adult generated granule cells help the DG to avoid suffering from catastrophic interference our results appear to be in clear 
accordance with a central prediction of our computational model [12]. In that computational simulation a model organism was subsequently exposed to 
different environments for a sufficient time to show adaptation. The reversal paradigm used in our study implements the same concept for living animals 
and into the framework of a well-characterized hippocampus-dependent learning task. As predicted, treated animals largely failed to adapt efficiently 
when the task’s contingencies changed following platform reversal. On the other hand the more general inability to develop fully allocentric search 
strategies was not predicted but this can be probably ascribed to the model’s simplicity. Although the model predicts the occurrence of catastrophic 
interference in the absence of adult neurogenesis, the specific phenotype of living animals remains dependent on many, largely unknown features of 
information processing in the DG.

Dada la hipótesis de que las células granulares generadas por adultos ayudan al DG a evitar sufrir interferencias catastróficas, nuestros resultados 
parecen estar en clara concordancia con una predicción central de nuestro modelo computacional [12]. En esa simulación computacional, un organismo modelo 
fue expuesto posteriormente a diferentes entornos durante un tiempo suficiente para mostrar adaptación. El paradigma de inversión utilizado en nuestro 
estudio implementa el mismo concepto para animales vivos y en el marco de una tarea de aprendizaje dependiente del hipocampo bien caracterizada. Como se 
predijo, los animales tratados fallaron en gran medida en adaptarse eficientemente cuando las contingencias de la tarea cambiaron después de la inversión 
de la plataforma. Por otro lado, la incapacidad más general para desarrollar estrategias de búsqueda completamente alocéntricas no fue predicha, pero 
esto probablemente puede atribuirse a la simplicidad del modelo. Aunque el modelo predice la ocurrencia de interferencias catastróficas en ausencia de 
neurogénesis adulta, el fenotipo específico de los animales vivos sigue dependiendo de muchas características, en gran parte desconocidas, del 
procesamiento de la información en el DG.

Our findings also need to be further discussed in the context of alternative ideas for specific functions of adult neurogenesis [3035]. It has been 
suggested that a neuronal turn-over situation might help the hippocampus to forget old memories in favor for newer ones [36]. At first glance our results 
support such a view because difficulties to cope efficiently with the platform’s reversal could be interpreted as simply being unable to forget the 
goal’s previous position. However, to master the task it is not required to forget the old platform position. Failure to apply precise allocentric 
behavioral strategies is not explicitly predicted by such a model because development of allocentric representations appears to involve the integration 
rather than exclusion of information experienced over time.

Nuestros hallazgos también necesitan ser discutidos más a fondo en el contexto de ideas alternativas para funciones específicas de la neurogénesis adulta 
[3035]. Se ha sugerido que una situación de recambio neuronal podría ayudar al hipocampo a olvidar viejos recuerdos a favor de los más nuevos [36]. A 
primera vista, nuestros resultados respaldan esta perspectiva porque las dificultades para lidiar eficientemente con la inversión de la plataforma 
podrían interpretarse simplemente como la incapacidad de olvidar la posición previa del objetivo. Sin embargo, para dominar la tarea no es necesario 
olvidar la antigua posición de la plataforma. La falla en la aplicación de estrategias conductuales alocéntricas precisas no es explícitamente predicha 
por dicho modelo porque el desarrollo de representaciones alocéntricas parece implicar la integración en lugar de la exclusión de la información 
experimentada a lo largo del tiempo.

A very detailed model of adult neurogenesis emphasizes the potential role of new neurons in the encoding of temporal information (‘‘time-stamp model’’) 
[30,31]. At present the temporal resolution of our experiment is too low and our knowledge about the actual stimuli between which the temporal 
association would have to be formed is to limited for addressing hypotheses from that model directly. In any case, adult-generated granule cells might 
serve multiple and distinct functions at different stages of their differentiation and maturation. Therefore, the different models – including our own 
model, from which we derived our hypothesis [12] – might each cover particular functional aspect of adult neurogenesis. A ‘‘grand unifying theory’’ will 
have to integrate these different aspects into one complete model.

Un modelo muy detallado de la neurogénesis adulta enfatiza el rol potencial de las nuevas neuronas en la codificación de información temporal (‘‘modelo 
de marca de tiempo’’) [30,31]. En la actualidad, la resolución temporal de nuestro experimento es demasiado baja y nuestro conocimiento sobre los 
estímulos reales entre los cuales la asociación temporal tendría que formarse es demasiado limitado para abordar hipótesis de ese modelo directamente. En 
cualquier caso, las células granulares generadas por adultos podrían cumplir múltiples y distintas funciones en diferentes etapas de su diferenciación y 
maduración. Por lo tanto, los diferentes modelos, incluyendo nuestro propio modelo, del cual derivamos nuestra hipótesis [12], podrían cubrir cada uno un 
aspecto funcional particular de la neurogénesis adulta. Una ‘‘gran teoría unificadora’’ tendrá que integrar estos diferentes aspectos en un modelo 
completo.


The effectiveness of TMZ in suppressing adult neurogenesis and the implication of this suppression on hippocampal performance were welcome in the context 
of our study. For the clinical context, however, our data might raise some concern about lasting cognitive side effects of anti-proliferative treatment 
that will certainly deserve further investigation.

Materials and Methods
---------------------

Animals and tissue preparation
------------------------------

For all experiments we used 6–8 weeks old female C57BL6 mice. To label adult generated cells animals received one single intraperitoneal injection of 
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU, 50 mg/kg body weight, Sigma). Tissue preparation was done as described [37]. The mice were kept at the animal facility of the 
Max Delbru¨ck Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC) Berlin-Buch, Germany. All local and federal regulations of animal welfare in research were followed. 
The experiment was approved by the responsible authority, Landesamt fu¨r Technische Sicherheit und Gesundheit (LaGetSi) Berlin.

Drug treatment
--------------

Temozolomide (TMZ, TemodalH, SP Europe, Belgium) is an alkylating agent intended for the treatment of recurrent malignant glioma. In a dosage finding 
experiment we found a dose of 25 mg/ kg body weight to be effective in suppressing adult neurogenesis by more than 80% after monocyclic (3 days) of 
treatment (Figure 1A).

Consequently, to suppress adult neurogenesis, mice from the treatment group (TMZ) received injections of TMZ at 25 mg/kg (i.p., 2,5 mg/ml in 0.9% NaCl), 
whereas the control group (CTR) received sham injections of saline only. This regimen was given on the first three days of a week for 4 weeks to resemble 
paradigms used for glioma treatment in humans (Figure 1B). Behavioral testing was performed 4 weeks after the final TMZ injection.

For adult-born granule cells to become recruitable the sequence of proliferation, differentiation and maturation requires approximately up to 28 days. 
Thus, suppressing adult neurogenesis for at least 4 weeks combined with a reconstitution period of 4 more weeks ensured that most of the cells borne 
immediately before onset of TMZ treatment would have been already used or eliminated by apoptosis. Using intercalating convalescence times, we minimized 
the risk of confounding side effects during behavioral testing.

It has recently been shown that 6–8 weeks old, adult generated granule cells become selectively recruited during acquisition of a spatial learning task 
[21]. Therefore, our primary aim was to minimize the number of potentially recruitable adult-born neurons exactly at that time, when the new granule 
cells should be of particularly high relevance for task acquisition. Because we suppressed proliferation for at least 4 weeks and behavioral testing 
began an additional 4 weeks later, at the time-point of the behavioral analysis the subpopulation of 5–7 week old adult generated neurons is primarily 
affected by TMZ. An immediate recovery of the stem cell niche seemed unlikely as it was found that after wiping out proliferation in the SGZ by 
irradiation reconstitution occurs only slow and on a prolonged timescale [38]. Consequently, at the time, when the mice were learning the water maze task 
only very few (or no) new granule cells were available to be functionally integrated into existing circuits.

Immunohistochemistry
--------------------

Histology procedures were performed as described previously (2). Briefly, animals were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde, the brains removed from the 
skulls, cryoprotected and sectioned at 40 mm on a dry ice-cooled sliding microtome. For immunostaining we used rat anti-BrdU (1:500, Biozol), goat 
anti-Iba1 (1:250, SantaCruz) as primary and biotinylated-anti-rat (1:500, Dianova) as secondary antibodies.

For visualization of BrdU incorporation, DNA was denatured in 2N HCL for 30 minutes at 37uC. Free floating sections were then rinsed in 0.1 M borate 
buffer, pH 8.5, and thoroughly washed in tris-buffered saline (TBS), pH 7.4. To block endogenous peroxidase reactions, sections were pretreated with 0.6% 
H2 O2 . Sections were incubated with primary antibody against BrdU in TBS supplemented with 0.1% TritonX-100 and 3% donkey serum (TBS-plus) at 4uC 
overnight. After rinsing the sections with TBS and a blocking step with TBS-plus, incubation with the biotinylated secondary antibody (1:500, Dianova) in 
TBS-plus followed. ABC reagent (Vectastain Elite, Vector Laboratories) was applied for 1 hour at a concentration of 9 ml/ml per reagent. Diaminobenzidine 
(DAB, Sigma) was used as a chromogen at 0.25 mg/ml in TBS with 0.01% H2 O 2 and 0.04% nickelchloride followed by rinsing with tap water and TBS. The 
sections were mounted on gelatine-coated glass slides and coverslipped with Neomount.

The number of BrdU-positive cells was analyzed following the standard routine of our laboratory. The method is a simplified version of the optical 
fractionator principle. In a complete series of 40 mm sections, 240 mm apart, BrdU-positive cells in the SGZ and the granule cell layer were counted 
exhaustively, but cells in the uppermost focal plane (at 406magnification) were disregarded to avoid oversampling at the cutting surfaces. All counts 
were done with the experimenter ignorant of the treatment group of the specimen. A total of 10 animals were used.

Hematology
----------

Blood cell counts were obtained using a Beckman Coulter Ac-T Diff Hematology Analyzer with a software version for veterinary applications. After 
anesthetizing the animals with diethylether, blood samples were taken from the retro-orbital sinus. Blood samples were taken 1 day 
before, 1 day after and 4 weeks after treatment and collected using EDTA coated MiniCollectH tubes (Greiner bio-one, Kremsmu¨nster, Austria). A total of 
five animals were used.

Electrophysiology
-----------------

350 mm-thick horizontal slices containing the entorhinal cortex, the subiculum, and the hippocampus were prepared from 3 to 4 months-old female mice. The 
slices were transferred to an interface recording chamber continuously perfused with an aerated (95% O2 , 5% CO2 ), prewarmed (32uC) artificial 
cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) containing (in mM) NaCl 129, Na2PO4 1.25, NaHCO3 26, KCl 3, CaCl2 1.6, MgSO4 1.8, glucose 10 at a pH of 7.4. After 2 h of 
equilibration the medial perforant path was stimulated and the evoked potentials in the dentate gyrus were recorded in the molecular layer above the 
upper blade by using a glass capillary microelectrode filled with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (tip resistance 2–3 MV). Microelectrodes were prepared 
from borosilicate glass tubes. After 10 min of stable baseline response to test stimulation (once every 30 s), the ability to elicit LTP was assessed. To 
induce LTP, four tetani of high-frequency stimulation were applied at 100 Hz for 1 s with 10 s intertrain intervals. Responses were recorded every 30 s 
for 30 min after LTP induction. In a parallel set of experiments, the ACSF contained 5 mM bicuculline (BCM, Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany) to block GABA A 
receptor-mediated inhibitory activity.

To record field EPSPs (fEPSPs) in the CA1 region of the hippocampus, afferent fibers of the Schaffer collateral pathway were stimulated and recordings 
were made in the CA1 pyramidal cell layer. For LTP experiments, a 10-min baseline was recorded by stimulating every 30 s. LTP was induced by using a 100 
Hz stimulation (four trains, 1 s in duration), after which responses were elicited once every 30 s at the same stimulation intensity for 30 min. Signals 
were filtered at 3 kHz and sampled at 10 kHz using a TIDA interface card (HEKA, Lambrecht, Pfalz, Germany).

All data were analyzed offline using TIDA software. Amplitudes of evoked field potentials were measured from an average of 4 peaks. Data were expressed 
as means6SEM and statistical comparison was done by repeated-measures ANOVA on the last 10 min (Aabel Software, Gigawiz). Significance level was set to 
p,0.05.

Rotarod and open field task
---------------------------

The rotating rod apparatus (Columbus Instruments) was used to measure the ability of the animals to improve their locomotor skills with training [39]. 1 
day before, 1 day after and 4 weeks after TMZ/sham treatment exploratory activity was evaluated using an open field test [40].

For the rotarod task mice were placed on the rod (3 cm in diameter) for three trials per day for three consecutive days. Each trial lasted a maximum of 5 
min, while the rotating rod underwent a linear acceleration from 4 to 40 rpm. Animals were scored for their latency to fall for each trial. Between the 
trials the animals rested a minimum of 10 min to avoid motoric fatigue. All animals were subjected to the rotarod task 1 day before, 1 day after and 4 
weeks after TMZ/vehicle treatment.

For the open field test each animal was placed in the center of a white plastic chamber (60660620 cm) under standard roomlighting conditions. Overall 
activity and the time spent by each animal in the center and/or the wall zone was measured and analyzed using a digital camera on the ceiling operated 
via Ethovision (Noldus, Netherlands). The time spent in the center was used as an index of general anxiety levels.

Morris water maze task (MWM)
----------------------------

Two weeks after end of treatment, mice were trained in the reference memory version of the Morris water maze task [41] to locate a hidden escape platform 
in a circular pool (1.89 m diameter). Water was made opaque with non-toxic white paint and kept at a temperature of 19–20uC. Each mouse was given 6 
trials a day for 5 consecutive days with an inter-trial interval (ITI) of 30 mins. Platform position was changed after day 3 (Figure 4). Mice were 
released from one of four possible starting points and allowed to search up to 120 s for the platform. During each day the starting position remained 
constant. Irrespective of trial performance mice were guided to the platform and allowed to remain there for at least 15 s. Swim paths were recorded 
using Ethovision (Noldus) and further analyzed using Matlab (The Mathworks, USA).

MWM data analysis
-----------------

General spatial learning was analyzed using classical parameters like latency to reach the platform, swim path length and relative time spent in the four 
quadrants (Figure 4).

To characterize the development of a spatial preference for the goal platform the MWM pool was divided into 10610 cm wide sectors allowing the presence 
probability of an animal in each sector to be represented as heat map-like occupancy plots.

To assess the qualitative aspects of learning the MWM task we analyzed the search strategies used by the animals to locate the hidden platform. 
Originally, the existence of different behavioral strategies in the context of spatial learning was demonstrated by Wolfer and Lipp [14,16,17,42]. Here 
the concept of different search strategies was modified as shown in Figure 5. Briefly, swim path data from Ethovision (Noldus, NL) were used to derive 
the time-tagged xy-coordinates for classifying the respective predominant search strategies by an algorithm implemented in Matlab. Classification 
criteria served an only descriptive function and were not meant to prove the involvement of particular cognitive processes or brain structures.

In the course of learning the MWM, the animals showed a sequential use of different search patterns ranging from initially almost undirected to spatially 
precise, highly efficient and allocentric strategies. Immediately after being introduced to the MWM pool the first time some animals showed a behavior 
known as ‘‘wall hugging’’ or ‘‘thigmotaxis’’. Thigmotaxis is considered to be a first and highly emotional response to a new and stressful situation. 
Usually thigmotaxis is rapidly overcome and replaced by the ‘‘random search’’ strategy covering the entire pool surface. As the animals gathered more 
knowledge of the MWM arena their search behavior became increasingly restricted to the central pool area where the availability of distant visual cues is 
maximal. Because in this stage the mice scan the environment for landmarks this strategy is called ‘‘scanning’’. For both random search and scanning any 
spatial or even directional preference is absent. ‘‘Chaining’’ is proposed to be a successor of scanning where the animals show a clear preference for 
the goal annulus having learned the correct distance of the goal platform to the wall. Once the animals develop a directional preference the use of 
distant visual landmarks is evident and thus their behavior albeit still being egocentric has become hippocampus-dependent. This point is marked by the 
‘‘directed search’’ strategy where the search becomes directional restricted in a triangular fashion pointing from the starting position towards the 
actual goal. Although path lengths swum may be initially not significantly shorter than for the scanning or chaining strategy directed search is usually 
the beginning of a subsequent refinement in the efficiency to reach the goal platform from each possible start position. This phase has to be considered 
as transition from egocentric to allocentric navigation. Therefore the two most efficient behavioral strategies to navigate to the hidden platform are 
‘‘focal search’’ where the animals spend most of the time in the nearest neighborhood of the goal and ‘‘direct swimming’’ where they navigate directly to 
the goal regardless of the actual starting position used. The development of a precise and place specific preference depends on the integration of the 
relevant cues into an allocentric cognitive representation. Principally ‘‘perseverance’’ can be found among all groups irrespective of treatment and 
represents a still present preference for the previous goal position until the animal’s behavior is changed as a sign of functional plasticity.

The classification process was implemented as a script in Matlab and relied on a set of numerical parameters (Figure 5) and applied those criteria to 
each trial of the MWM experiment therefore providing an unbiased objective method to identify certain qualitative properties of the recorded swim paths. 
All criteria represent the common abstract properties of the respective strategy and correspond directly to their special functional demands. To avoid 
misclassifications due to shared features among multiple strategy definitions the classification process excludes the respective patterns serially. Thus 
search patterns all of which are enclosed by other patterns as special cases have to be sorted first followed by the less precisely defined ones. The 
algorithm used in our study was tested on 4320 example trials showing an overall reliability of more than 90% (trials not recognized at all were 
interpreted as errors).

Convolution analysis
--------------------

Generally, mice can use different higher-level strategies to learn the MWM task. As an alternative to an effective progression towards the principally 
most precise search strategies animals could also just improve their proficiency in applying less precise strategies. Which of those higher-level 
strategies is preferentially used makes a  fundamental difference for interpreting the true hippocampal learning. Especially under the highly 
reductionistic conditions found for the MWM task just 
practicing non-spatial strategies such as scanning or chaining can result in comparable latency times without any contribution of hippocampus-specific 
behaviors. Therefore we evaluated the respective contribution of both general strategies using convolution analysis [14].

Learning performance in a spatial task is usually measured using parameters like latency or path length. Common to those parameters is their dependence 
on more basic variables that cannot be easily assessed directly. Accordingly both latency and path length can be interpreted as values of convoluted 
functions. Given the concept of distinct qualitative search strategies, learning performance in the MWM depends on the respective frequency with which a 
respective strategy is applied (function f(x)) and the quality that is found in applying a certain search pattern as measured by the respective path 
length for that pattern (function e(y)). Thus for the animals’ task performance we get p(t) = (f * e)(t) as the convoluted function of f(x) and e(y).

To estimate the relative contribution of each respective function to the learning performance p(t) we compared the measured path length for each search 
strategy (p(t)) with a prediction derived from a model where either the frequency (f(x) dx) or quality (e(y) dy) is held constant for the whole 
experiment. The respective means of frequency and path length over all days were used as constants to calculate those predictions (Figure 6D).


References

1. Santarelli L, Saxe M, Gross C, Surget A, Battaglia F, et al. (2003) Requirement of hippocampal neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of 
antidepressants. Science 301: 805–809.

2. Saxe MD, Battaglia F, Wang JW, Malleret G, David DJ, et al. (2006) Ablation of hippocampal neurogenesis impairs contextual fear conditioning and 
synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103: 17501–17506.

3. Shors TJ, Miesegaes G, Beylin A, Zhao M, Rydel T, et al. (2001) Neurogenesis in the adult is involved in the formation of trace memories. Nature 410: 
372–376.

4. Shors TJ, Townsend DA, Zhao M, Kozorovitskiy Y, Gould E (2002) Neurogenesis may relate to some but not all types of hippocampal-dependent learning. 
Hippocampus 12: 578–584.

5. Snyder JS, Hong NS, McDonald RJ, Wojtowicz JM (2005) A role for adult neurogenesis in spatial long-term memory. Neuroscience 130: 843–852.

6. Zhang CL, Zou Y, He W, Gage FH, Evans RM (2008) A role for adult TLXpositive neural stem cells in learning and behavior. Nature 2008.

7. Dupret D, Revest JM, Koehl M, Ichas F, De Giorgi F, et al. (2008) Spatial relational memory requires hippocampal adult neurogenesis. PLoS ONE 3: 
e1959.

8. Dupret D, Fabre A, Dobrossy MD, Panatier A, Rodriguez JJ, et al. (2007) Spatial learning depends on both the addition and removal of new hippocampal 
neurons. PLoS Biol 5: e214.

9. Kempermann G, Gage FH (2002) Genetic determinants of adult hippocampal neurogenesis correlate with acquisition, but not probe trial performance in the 
water maze task. Eur J Neurosci 16: 129–136.

10. Kempermann G (2002) Why new neurons? Possible functions for adult hippocampal neurogenesis. J Neurosci 22: 635–638.

11. Kempermann G (2008) The neurogenic reserve hypothesis: what is adult hippocampal neurogenesis good for? Trends Neurosci 31: 163–169.

12. Wiskott L, Rasch MJ, Kempermann G (2006) A functional hypothesis for adult hippocampal neurogenesis: avoidance of catastrophic interference in the 
dentate gyrus. Hippocampus 16: 329–343.

13. Wolfer DP, Mohajeri HM, Lipp HP, Schachner M (1998) Increased flexibility and selectivity in spatial learning of transgenic mice ectopically 
expressing the neural cell adhesion molecule L1 in astrocytes. Eur J Neurosci 10: 708–717.

could also just improve their proficiency in applying less precise strategies. Which of those higher-level strategies is preferentially used makes a 
fundamental difference for interpreting the true hippocampal learning. Especially under the highly reductionistic conditions found for the MWM task just 
practicing non-spatial strategies such as scanning or chaining can result in comparable latency times without any contribution of hippocampus-specific 
behaviors. Therefore we evaluated the respective contribution of both general strategies using convolution analysis [14].

Learning performance in a spatial task is usually measured using parameters like latency or path length. Common to those parameters is their dependence 
on more basic variables that cannot be easily assessed directly. Accordingly both latency and path length can be interpreted as values of convoluted 
functions. Given the concept of distinct qualitative search strategies, learning performance in the MWM depends on the respective frequency with which a 
respective strategy is applied (function f(x)) and the quality that is found in applying a certain search pattern as measured by the respective path 
length for that pattern (function e(y)). Thus for the animals’ task performance we get p(t) = (f * e)(t) as the convoluted function of f(x) and e(y).

To estimate the relative contribution of each respective function to the learning performance p(t) we compared the measured path length for each search 
strategy (p(t)) with a prediction derived from a model where either the frequency (f(x) dx) or quality (e(y) dy) is held constant for the whole 
experiment. The respective means of frequency and path length over all days were used as constants to calculate those predictions (Figure 6D).

Author Contributions

Conceived and designed the experiments: AG GK. Performed the experiments: AG JB. Analyzed the data: AG JB GK. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis 
tools: AG JB. Wrote the paper: AG GK.

14. Brody DL, Holtzman DM (2006) Morris water maze search strategy analysis in PDAPP mice before and after experimental traumatic brain injury. Exp 
Neurol 197: 330–340.

15. Wolfer DP, Madani R, Valenti P, Lipp HP (2001) Extended analysis of path data from mutant mice using the public domain software Wintrack. Physiol 
Behav 73: 745–753.

16. Wolfer DP, Lipp HP (2000) Dissecting the behaviour of transgenic mice: is it the mutation, the genetic background, or the environment? Exp Physiol 
85: 627–634.

17. Balschun D, Wolfer DP, Gass P, Mantamadiotis T, Welzl H, et al. (2003) Does cAMP response element-binding protein have a pivotal role in hippocampal 
synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent memory? J Neurosci 23: 6304–6314.

18. Chowdhury S, Vaughan MM, Gore ME (1999) New approaches to the systemic treatment of melanoma. Cancer Treat Rev 25: 259–270.

19. EMEA (2005) European puplic assessment report: Temodal; EMEA/H/C/ 0229.

20. Mason WP (2005) Progress in clinical neurosciences: Advances in the management of low-grade gliomas. Can J Neurol Sci 32: 18–26.

21. Kee N, Teixeira CM, Wang AH, Frankland PW (2007) Preferential incorporation of adult-generated granule cells into spatial memory networks in the 
dentate gyrus. Nat Neurosci 10: 355–362.

22. Wang S, Scott BW, Wojtowicz JM (2000) Heterogenous properties of dentate granule neurons in the adult rat. J Neurobiol 42: 248–257.

23. Schmidt-Hieber C, Jonas P, Bischofberger J (2004) Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated granule cells of the adult hippocampus. Nature 429: 
184–187.

24. Wang JW, David DJ, Monckton JE, Battaglia F, Hen R (2008) Chronic fluoxetine stimulates maturation and synaptic plasticity of adult-born hippocampal 
granule cells. J Neurosci 28: 1374–1384.

25. Kempermann G, Gage FH (2002) Genetic influence on phenotypic differentiation in adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 134: 1–12.

26. Goodrich-Hunsaker NJ, Hunsaker MR, Kesner RP (2008) The interactions and dissociations of the dorsal hippocampus subregions: how the dentate gyrus, 
CA3, and CA1 process spatial information. Behav Neurosci 122: 16–26.

27. Steele RJ, Morris RG (1999) Delay-dependent impairment of a matching-toplace task with chronic and intrahippocampal infusion of the NMDA-antagonist 
D-AP5. Hippocampus 9: 118–136.

28. Saxe MD, Malleret G, Vronskaya S, Mendez I, Garcia AD, et al. (2007) Paradoxical influence of hippocampal neurogenesis on working memory. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 104: 4642–4646.

29. Brandeis R, Brandys Y, Yehuda S (1989) The use of the Morris Water Maze in the study of memory and learning. Int J Neurosci 48: 29–69.

30. Aimone JB, Wiles J, Gage FH (2006) Potential role for adult neurogenesis in the encoding of time in new memories. Nat Neurosci 9: 723–727.

31. Aimone JB, Wiles J, Gage FH (2009) Computational influence of adult neurogenesis on memory encoding. Neuron 61: 187–202.

32. Becker S (2005) A computational principle for hippocampal learning and neurogenesis. Hippocampus 15: 722–738.

33. Becker S, Wojtowicz JM (2007) A model of hippocampal neurogenesis in memory and mood disorders. Trends Cogn Sci 11: 70–76.

34. Chambers RA, Potenza MN, Hoffman RE, Miranker W (2004) Simulated apoptosis/neurogenesis regulates learning and memory capabilities of adaptive neural 
networks. Neuropsychopharmacology 29: 747–758.

35. Deisseroth K, Singla S, Toda H, Monje M, Palmer TD, et al. (2004) Excitationneurogenesis coupling in adult neural stem/progenitor cells. Neuron 42: 
535–552.

36. Feng R, Rampon C, Tang YP, Shrom D, Jin J, et al. (2001) Deficient Neurogenesis in Forebrain-Specific Presenilin-1 Knockout Mice Is Associated with 
Reduced Clearance of Hippocampal Memory Traces. Neuron 32: 911–926.

37. Kronenberg G, Reuter K, Steiner B, Brandt MD, Jessberger S, et al. (2003) Subpopulations of proliferating cells of the adult hippocampus respond 
differently to physiologic neurogenic stimuli. J Comp Neurol 467: 455–463.

38. Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS, Alvarez-Buylla A (2001) Astrocytes give rise to new neurons in the adult mammalian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21: 
7153–7160.

39. Le Marec N, Caston J, Lalonde R (1997) Impaired motor skills on static and mobile beams in lurcher mutant mice. Exp Brain Res 116: 131–138.

40. Walsh RN, Cummins RA (1976) The Open-Field Test: a critical review. Psychol Bull 83: 482–504.

41. Morris R (1984) Developments of a water-maze procedure for studying spatial learning in the rat. J Neurosci Methods 11: 47–60.

42. Janus C (2004) Search strategies used by APP transgenic mice during navigation in the Morris water maze. Learn Mem 11: 337–346.



